In this lesson, I want to take a slightly deeper dive into a few more options with filtering and predicates
that I didn't show in the previous lesson.
We're just I'm just going to show additional techniques that we could use when we want to do things
like that because there's so much rich functionality there.
And just so you don't get confused, by the way, that I start to teach this, I will.
I'll let you know now that I will be showing these techniques as if I hadn't shown the previous techniques
in the previous lesson.
OK, so this will be kind of an alternative and additional set of techniques for doing these filtering.
All right.
So what if we wanted to filter out certain records or objects that will result from us passing out these
employees here?
Like, let's say, for example, we wanted to filter out this particular Fred Flintstone because the
employee type is programmers, right?
How could we do that?
So we're going to run through a few different approaches to doing that kind of filtering now, and we'll
start off with maybe one of the simpler approaches.
All right.
So we want to get rid of this guy with the programmers.
So coming down here, let's take a look at how we're doing things currently.
So we know that we start off with a stream of strings, right?
Then those strings one at a time are being passed into this create employee method that is returning
a stream of AI employees.
Then we're mapping those employees to a stream of employees, right?
And then we're collecting them.
So we've got a number of options here.
So first off, let's see if we can filter out that one programmers up here before we even convert anything
into an object.
And I think this should be pretty easy.
But I'm going to introduce another method for you.
So what we're wanting to do is to filter.
So can you guess what the method that I'm about to introduce may be called?
All right.
So you may have guessed it's going to be called filter, and the filter method takes as an input something
called a predicate.
And the predicate is just an interface, a generic functional interface that takes an input of an object
and it returns a boolean true or false.
The reason it returns a boolean true or false is because it allows us to implement a lambda or some
code that determines whether or not the object in question, the object that was passed into the predicate
should be permitted to continue through the stream or be filtered out.
If our predicate method returns are true, then the object will be permitted to continue through the
stream.
If it returns a false, then it will be filtered out.
OK, so let's see here.
So since we're wanting to get rid of this program, if we create an instance of a predicate using,
let's say, a lambda, which would generally be the easiest way to do this, can you think of what type
of objects will be passed in to the predicate?
All right.
So strings are what are going to be passed into the predicate because string is what comes out of the
previous step in our pipeline here.
OK.
So if we make a lambda expression that accepts a string and then returns a true or a false, depending
on whether or not programmer's exists here, that should probably do the trick, right?
So let's see what that might look like.
So let's see.
I'll use the variable for the lambda called s four string and then I'll use the arrow indicator here.
And so what we want to do is we want to see is programmer's z contained in the string, right?
So I pretty much gave away how I'm going to do this right?
So we could do something like s that contains.
And then programmer, one, two, three, four five, do something like that now we need to be a little
careful because this isn't actually quite what we're looking for yet.
This is kind of the opposite of what we want.
This would return a true if programmers exists in the current string, which is s, and if it returns
a true, then it would be allowed to stay in the stream.
We want the opposite behavior that we want to get rid of it if programmers is in this string, right?
So we need to negate the result here.
And so there are a few ways we can do this now.
Two of the most functional ways I'm going to show you here.
First off, what we could do is select this entire lambda expression.
I'm going to hold down on option an up arrow to keep selecting until I've selected the whole entire
expression there.
And then I can do a command option or an option command T and then choose number one, which is just
to surround the entire expression in parentheses.
I could do this without using any fancy key bindings as well, but you know me by now.
So I'm going to choose number one so that just put parentheses around the entire expression.
And then if I go to the beginning of this expression, I can actually make use of a static method that
comes with the predicate interface.
So the predicate interface has a few static methods on it.
And one of the static methods is called not.
So you see here a predicate does not, and it does it.
And all that does is it just kind of negates whatever the logic is that is returning from the lambda
expression that we have inside of here, right?
So it takes one predicate and then it allows us to negate that predicate.
OK.
So I can hit return and that gets used now.
Now, notice it has put the the the interface named predicate in front of it.
I actually can get rid of that if I want to, because this is a static method so I could statically
import the method and I can do that by just selecting Predicate here and deleting that in the period.
Now I've got now the NOT has gone red because it's not being it's not imported.
But if I do an option, return there we go or an alt return that will import that.
And if I go up here to the top, you'll see there it is right there.
Line seven it got statically imported, so the static import just allows us to refer to a static method
without having to prepend it with the class or interface that it is a member of, which means that we
can shorten the the line right, just shortening the line a little bit.
OK, so that's one way we can do this.
Let's go ahead and run this and ensure that programmers isn't showing up in our list anymore.
Now, we won't actually see programmers, right?
Well, we would what we would have seen as a an employee with the first and last name of in a right.
In fact, if we just comment this out real quick just to confirm that and I'll rerun it again.
There it is in a in a right.
So that's what we're filtering out.
OK, so all right, let me uncomment that.
Now, let me show you another way that we could do this, by the way someone to delete and not.
And I'm going to get rid of the parentheses as well.
All right.
Now, another way we could do this is to actually select this lambda expression for this predicate and
extract it into a variable.
So I'm selecting the entire thing, right?
And then I'm going to do an option command v to introduce a variable.
Let's call this dummy employee selector because this will be a predicate that selects dummy employees.
OK.
So look what happened here.
My expression is now over here, and it's being stored inside of an instance of a predicate for strings
because string is the data type that goes in to this predicate, which is this s here, right?
And it it it can be used to select, if you will, for dummy employees.
OK, now watch this Though the predicate interface has other methods on it as well.
And I can invoke one of these methods to do my bidding.
And so again, we're we're trying to reverse the selection behavior here, right, so that we can filter
out lines that do contain programmers.
So now that I have this as an actual instance of a as an explicit instance of a predicate here, I can
now put my cursor here, period, and look at this.
I've got a few methods here, and one of them is called Negate.
So I can negate the logic or the behavior, which is simply to say that if it was returning a true now,
it's going to return a false.
And if it was returning a false, it's going to return to true.
So it's not magic at all.
It's like the easiest, simplest thing they could have given to us, but kind of useful here, right?
And so if we run this again in a should again disappear from this list, there we go.
Yes, in a is indeed gone.
All right.
One other thing now, um, let's see.
I could also select this variable and do what is called inclining it where I will actually revert back.
Basically, I will revert back to not using a variable and just having this lambda expression explicitly
here.
However, watch what happens if I do it while I have this, don't negate here, OK, and I can do an
option command in.
And then the ID asks me, Do I want to find all references to this variable or just this one?
I only have the one, so it doesn't really matter right now.
I'm going to click Refactor.
Now, look what it just did.
Let me let me close that down there.
So look what it did.
It brought back the original expression, but then it surrounded it in parentheses and it's casting
it.
It's casting my expression because really, the part that's the expression is just this bit here, right?
Just that bit there.
But it's now casting this expression as a predicate of strings.
And then it's surrounding all of that in parentheses so that I can call the dot in the gate.
So this is yet another way that we can make use of these methods that are on the predicate interface
by simply by simply casting a lambda expression to the predicate type.
OK.
So there's multiple ways to do this.
And now that I've done this, I don't even need this line here anymore.
I can just get rid of that.
OK.
So lots of ways.
Now I personally, you know, this is getting to be a little noisy for my taste.
It's kind of a lot of parentheses to to keep track of and pay attention to.
So I'm not a huge fan of this.
I think I would probably prefer if you want to use the negate thing here, I probably would personally
prefer to do our last bit.
I'm going to undo this, you know, and just just extract a method.
I'm sorry.
Just.
Extract a variable out of the sky this way instead.
But yeah, so there's some options there.
OK, so we've just done the filtering at the string level, right, where we're just getting rid of
the actual string.
But of course, we could do this in other ways as well.
What if we did it after everything was already converted into an object, right?
So let me get rid of this filter here, and I think I'll get rid of this as well.
So let's say we decided to filter after the objects were employees.
OK, so I'll put my cursor there, make a new line.
And what could we key on?
We won't be able to key on the word programmer's z because we wouldn't have access to that anymore.
Once these lines have been converted to employees right now, we would have in a though in a as a first
and last name for the dummy employee that would result from this line so we could filter that way.
So let's see what that might look like.
So I'll do a dot filter.
Let's see, and we're going to receive an employee as the input to the predicate.
So that would be an easy summary.
I'm just so I'm going to refer to that as E.
By the way, I can call this a whole entire name.
You know, I can use a variable name, a long variable name if I want to just being kind of lazy here
and trying to keep my my lambda expressions kind of short.
Employee.
So let's see.
Maybe we could say something like where employee dot, uh, get last name equals.
In a right, we could say something like that.
Now, typically in this case, I mentioned this many, many, many lessons ago.
Typically, in this case, you may want to code this a little more defensively by actually flipping
this around and having the constant of in at the beginning like this in a dot equals.
Right.
Doing this instead.
And the reason for that is because if for some reason, this variable here were null with the other
approach, we would get an old pointer exception if this happened to be null.
But with this approach, you won't have to worry about that problem.
Now, if your class, if the employee class has a constructor that won't allow employees to be created
unless you're specifying a first and last name, or if you're just certain that there's it's impossible
for the last name in this case to ever be null, then it doesn't matter so much.
So just be mindful of that, though this is, you know, I've mentioned before.
This is a common pattern, though, to flip things around and have the string constant at the beginning.
Now you may be wondering why I didn't do that on the previous filtering, where we did the lines and
I was looking for programmers.
In that case, I wasn't using the equals method I was using contains, and so I didn't have a choice
there.
OK.
All right.
So here's this and now we're going to have the same issue again, though I need to negate this first,
right?
So I maybe will just select all of that, extract the variable out, call it blah blah blah.
For now, I don't feel like naming this anything great.
So I'm just going to take that default name there and then I can do a dot negate.
Like, So.
OK, let me under this, though, just to show you.
I also could just put an exclamation mark in front of the in front of this, this expression here,
right?
This exclamation mark, as we've learned before, simply negates the the the method here so equals.
So this is saying not equals.
So let's run this and then confirm.
Yeah, there we go.
All right.
So let's see.
Let's put this back to, uh, using the predicate here.
And I don't know, I'll go ahead and call this dummy employee selector again.
OK, now what if we also wanted to filter out employees whose salaries are lower than $5000?
OK, so we want to get rid of the the employees whose salaries are less than five thousand bucks.
So one way we could do that is simply to add another filter here.
And we could say something like employee where I'd get salary is less than five thousand.
Now, if we're wanting to filter them, filter out employees who make less than five thousand, then
of course we'd have to negate this now.
Obviously, one thing we could do is just flip the logic there, right?
Allow everybody who's making more than $5000.
Right.
So if I run this?
All right.
Yeah.
So now we don't see anyone making less than five grand.
Right?
So that's pretty self-explanatory.
Now let me show you another thing we could do.
We can combine predicates together really nicely.
So if I select this predicate here and extract that out into a variable and let's say that, I don't
know, I'll call this over.
Five K selector.
OK, so we've got a dummy employee selector and an over five case selector right now, what I could
do is combine these all in one filter so I could get rid of this secondary filter here, and I could
combine these two predicates that we have all in one, I could say filter dummy employees, selectors
with the negation there and.
Over five K selector.
Let's run that.
So now I'm getting the behavior that I that we had before, but all in one right and I could even do
something like select all of this and extract the variable out of that and then name it something a
little more meaningful, like
no dummies and over five.
OK.
Right.
So you can kind of combine these predicates to make kind of more rich, richly named and rich, more
richly implemented predicates.
Now, in addition to the and here, there's also an order right there.
There's an order.
So I'll leave it to you to play with that.
But you know that that will do the logical or instead of an end where so obviously within and it means
that both clauses have to be true in order for the whole thing to be true with an or only one of the
clauses must be true in order for the entire clause to be true.
OK.
OK, so that's going to wrap up this deeper dive into predicates and filtering, and I will see you
in the next one.